This episode is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000 documentaries.
Get unlimited access for just $2 and 99 cents a month. And for our audience,
you can get your first 30 days completely free. If you sign up a curiosity,
stream.com/biographics and use the promo code biographics and let's get into it.
According to legend Sparta's wife,
once walked in on a sleeping husband to find a snake who wrapped itself around
his face, instead of being alarmed, she took this as a prophecy,
just like the serpent surrounded itself around the warriors head. No,
shall sparas be enveloped by a great fearful power.
One thing the woman could not see, however,
was if this power would lead her husband to glory or disaster
in the end, you will have to decide for yourself what the outcome was.
Spars might have lost the war. Sure,
but NOFOR making the all powerful Roman Republic tremble at his
feet at a time when the might of Rome was continuously expanding all over the
Mediterranean AIS slave led an uprising. The likes of which had never been seen.
He defeated wave after wave of Roman armies and looked for a while.
At least powerful enough to March on Rome itself,
his actions turned sparas into much more than a warrior.
He became a symbol in the fight against oppression, a symbol,
which is still pervasive today. Over 2000 years later,
they say that history is written by the victors. So in that case,
sparas Roman was indeed one of glory.
Nobody mentions the success of crass in putting down a slave uprising.
Instead they talk about the triumph and the bravery of sparas
Unsurprisingly details are scarce regarding sparas life before he rose up and
became the bane of Rome. Even the particulars,
we do know can't be taken for granted because different ancient sources give
varying accounts.
Everyone seems to agree that sparas was a Thra born sometime around the 111
BCE Pluto, a one of the main sources for the war of sparas as he called it,
referred to the warrior as having nomadic stock and described him as being
sagacious and culturally superior, practically more Len than tation.
Some modern scholars have speculated that the word nomadic was a mistranslation
made later.
And that Pluto a actually referred to sparas as being of made eye stark.
The Mady were aeration tribe from those times, which existed in modern day,
Bulgaria,
eventually Spartacus ended up fighting in the Roman army as an auxiliary unit.
At one point,
the Thon earns the scorn of the Romans who captured him and sold himm into
slavery. Again,
sources vary as to the reason why some say that deserted others say that
he led rating parties, or perhaps it was just both
As a slave. Sparas called the eye of one Len batty artist,
Roman who owned a gladiator school called a LUS in Kawa.
He was always on the lookout for strong goals.
Andras who could shed some blood for the pleasure of the crowd in the arena.
Sparas took on the role of a heavyweight gladiator called a Mami.
The look of this warrior is a Hollywood favorite and will be familiar to anyone
who see in gladiators in movies,
the Manila wore a full bronze helmet and a heavy arm leg and shoulder guards.
However, he kept his chest bare,
which often allowed warriors to display the tattoos or battle scars.
They had accrued over the years,
the gladiator often wielded a large shield and straight broad sort.
Although sparas has always been depicted in movies and TV shows as ad just
fighter. We actually do not know anything about his success in the arena.
Since these battles are usually to the death,
he was presumably skilled enough to survive until the uprising started either
that or he was entertaining enough to convince the crowd, to spare him.
Even if he lost
In the year 73 BCE sparas was part of a plot to escape batty artists'
gladiator school.
The number differs Pluto talk says 78 slaves armed themselves with utensils from
the kitchen, defeated the guards and made a run for it. During their escape,
they ran into carts full of gladiator weapons being sent to another city.
They plundered the wagons and armed themselves properly.
The former slaves decided to seek refuge on Mount fus,
which offered a stronger defensive position on their way there.
They recruited other slaves,
as well as Freeman who wanted to join their course ancient sources.
They never really made it clear what exactly sparas did or said to the other
slaves to convince them that he should be their leader. One fact,
which certainly played a part was the fact that the men split all their punter
equally, but it should be mentioned.
The historians also named two go Crysis and mouses leaders of the revolts.
While some describe them as being equals of sparas others like Appian refer to
them as subordinate offices.
It is fair to say when the Roman center heard about sparas in his little
uprising, that they didn't take it too seriously. We may mock them for it now,
but back then, this made a lot of sense.
Rome had quite a few problems on its hands that required its attention.
And more importantly, its soldiers in the Iberian peninsula,
Rome was engaged in the Satan war against Quinta sat say former Roman
statesman who chose the losing side during the seconds of a war of the Roman
Republic,
but refused to concede defeat over an Asia minor ring was fighting the third
myth redic war against the kingdom of Ponta led by myth. Ruti the sixth.
This eventually resulted in a decisive victory for Roman the end of the pontic
Ambar, but not until 10 years of vicious battles. As you can see,
Rome suddenly had its playful.
Therefore the revolt of gladiators was dismissed as nothing more than a crime
wave that could be solved with a cohort or two in charge of this force was a pre
named GAAS Claudias gliber of whom we know almost nothing.
His name suggests he could have had some kind of distant connection with the
influential cloudy family,
but really his only appearance in the historical record is his battle against
sparas. He has never mentioned again,
whether this means he died in battle or he never did anything else of notes.
We simply don't. No. Anyway, LAR army consisted of approximately 3000 militia,
not proper Roman legionaries again,
the fact that the Senate sent an unproven military commander leading untrained
militia revealed how little they were concerned about the uprising Laers units.
They chased the Gators to their camp on Mount for Seus and laid seeds.
On the only road down the mountain, his plan was simply to,
for the insurgents to staff to death, it seemed like a fine strategy.
Albeit a tad on original sparas did not have this problem. In fact,
his side developed a much more novel game plan.
He knew that Glover was only paying attention to the side with the dissent
because all the others consisted of steep cliffs,
which were seemingly impossible. However,
he and his men made rope ladders out of wild vines that were plentiful in the
area and repelled down undetected by the Romans.
They then surrounded Glovers camp and easily defeated his forces by surprise
attack. In the end,
all this expedition managed to do was supply the rebels with better weapons and
armor and help bolster their numbers. As more people heard of their exploits
On the second attempt,
Romes end another trait named either Publius ver or Publius hilarious.
There are no GC details to share regarding these fights.
Just the fact that sparas and his men tramped. Again,
first they defeated one of the protesters left tens named furious,
who also had 2000 soldiers with him.
Another Pretor called who had been sent out with another large force to offer
support to vers.
He was almost taken prisoner by the insurgents as the gladiators caught him off
guard while the Pretor was bathing. Lastly,
the rebels defeated ver sent us a symbol of his victory.
Sparas took the Preuss horse.
Now the gladiator army was free to raid the countryside of Italy unopposed as
more and more men from the region swell their racks.
According to Appian sparas as army boasted over 70,000 soldiers,
presumably on mouse died around this time,
possibly in battle as he is no longer mentioned by historians sparas and Crysis
are referred to as the commanders of this rebel army. At this point,
the insurgents reached to possible crossroads in their journey.
One which still divide it both classical and modern scholars.
According to Pluto,
a sparas wanted to traverse the Alps and escape room and territory. In his view,
the thre plan to disbands the army once had secured freedom.
However sparas could not convince his men who were feeling cocky enough,
that they wanted to continue rating.
Other sources claimed that the plan was and always had been to March
on Rome.
The notion that there was some dissension in the ranks regarding their next move
was strengthened by the fact that at one point,
the rebels split into two different armies.
One was led by sparas the other by Crysis whether this division was strategic so
that they could cover more ground, or if it was caused by disagreements,
we cannot say with any certainty now,
just before we get into the rest of today's video,
I do wanna quickly mention today's sponsor who make our videos possible and
that's curiosity stream.
Now I have actually seen a lot of people hitting me up on Twitter and saying how
much they are enjoying curiosity stream, which is excellent. Uh,
if you wanna say hi to me on that platform, I'm at Simon Whistler,
look me up if you want to.
And I think that is just because what we do here at biographics,
I kind of see them as sort of little documentaries and then curiosity stream.
It's very much in line with that. Indeed.
They've got over 2000 documentaries and nonfiction titles from some of the
world's best filmmakers.
Now is I gonna shock you to learn that there's plenty of document is about Rome
on curiosity stream. If you just search Rome in the platform,
you're gonna get a whole lot of interesting options.
Now I've mentioned a series called the butterfly effect before,
which I've really enjoyed. They've got a couple of episodes about Rome,
one about Augustus, and one about Carthage. They're definitely worth a watch.
And you can do all of that. Watching for free for 30 days are link,
curiosity, stream.com/biographics it's also below. And when you are, uh,
checking out,
use the code biographics and that will give you those 30 days for free.
After that it's just $2 99 cents a month, which is just super cheap.
It's super great. Definitely check it out.
It also spots the show and let's go back to sparas.
By this point,
the Senate realized that the little uprising caused by the escaped slaves was no
laughing Madans it was only growing in power.
Some have argued that the Roman leaders were reticent to unleash the true might
of Rome, because it would've been an admittance of defeat.
Just the idea that a few ins slaves,
Germans and go could threat in the Roman public.
It was a bit of an embarrassment, but after a year of the rebels running wilds,
the senators had enough in 72 BC, it tasked two consoles,
Guo and lentils to put an end to the uprising and each one commanded a Roman
Legion, the exact size of Allegion.
It actually varied throughout the degree of Rome. Uh,
according to li during the Republic,
the Senate set the size at the start of the year based on availability and
circumstances.
Although typically Allegion contained around 4,000 infantry and a few hundred
cavalry, it would vary anywhere from 3000 to 6,000 soldiers,
regardless of how many men the legions had.
They were still vastly outnumbered by the insurgent. Four is however,
what they liked in manpower. They more than made up for,
with strict military training and top of the line equipment spar forces on the
other hands, they consisted mostly of peasants, deserters, slaves,
and shepherds.
Very few of them stood a chance against a Roman soldier in combat.
So here we arrive at a bit of a contentious moment because the main source is
Pluto,
tar and Appian give differing accounts on the battles between sparas and the
consular armies. They do not necessarily contradict each other,
but they each mention events that the other ignores, as I said previously,
the rebel forces split into two armies.
Both historians agree that Guo and his Legion fought Crysis who commanded
around 30,000 men. And all of that happens in Mount ganas.
This encounter resulted in a decisive victory for the Romans,
the rebel army lost around two thirds of its troops, including Crysis,
who was killed in battle. When hearing of this Barus alleged,
he sacrificed 300 Roman soldiers in his honor.
Both sources also agree that sparas and the main insurgent force faced the army
of Len while heading for CIS Aine goal and triumph afterwards, however,
the account start to differ.
You have to remember that even in the best sources we have for the war of sparas
wrote their accounts over 150 years after the uprising had taken place,
many details could certainly have been altered or forgotten according to AEN GAO
and his men headed towards Spartacus after defeating Crysis.
His hope was that he would reach the Spartan army in times of trapped between
the two legions commanded by him and lentils. However,
he was too late and the Thon had time to best the other console,
turn his soldiers around and defeat Gaius in combat.
The two consular legions were retreated and regrouped back in Rome,
they then United as a single Armyn made a third attempt against sparas that PCE,
but they were once again,
defeated police arch makes no mention of sparas as fired against Gallia saw the
battle of PI against both consoles. Instead,
he says that after the Thon bested lends,
he engaged in combat with an army of 10,000 men led by GAAS Cassius
longness the governor of CI Alpine go once again, he was victorious.
There is also some confusion regarding what happened after spars defeated the
consular armies, our Pluto tar offers no concrete information,
more or less places sparas on the war path to Rome.
Maybe it was the death of Crysis or maybe he thought himself invincible in
battle, but sparas seemed determined to pillage mighty Rome itself.
He killed all his prisoners and his pack animals and set fire to any useless
materials that might have burdened and slowed him down.
He marched capital with an army of 120,000 footmen.
Despite his gungho attitude,
spars had a change of heart on the way and realized that perhaps his army was
not strong enough just yet.
Instead he took over the city of Thiry and the surrounding mountains and
conducted raids for bronze and irons to forge weapons and equip its troops.
The Senate drops any pretense that the Spartan rebellion was anything else than
a major threat that's endangered the Republic itself.
He gave the task of putting down the uprising once and for all to Marcus lain
crass CRAs is primarily remember today for allegedly being the richest man in
Roman history. The true extent wealth is impossible to gauge with accuracy,
but it could have been up to 20 billion in modern currency.
The number most commonly used is 200 million SU stur.
An estimation provided by plenty.
Please aren't used gold talents to quantify crashes as wealth and placed it at
over 7,100 talents, which would mean in modern times,
about 213 metric,
tons of gold grasses as fortune came from fire and war,
making the public calamities,
his greatest source of revenue as Pluto tar put it.
Some of his lucrative businesses included a fire department.
That's arrived to burning home and only extinguished the flames.
If it's negotiated a generous bargain with the owner,
otherwise the men simply looked on as the home burn to the ground.
Afterwards crass even offered to buy the property at a significantly reduced
price. Of course,
another one of his schemes was a school for slaves by taking cheap unskilled
labor and giving them training.
He increased their value significantly and then sold them for a tiny profit,
the bulk of crass as well. However, came from really estate.
He was an ally of Soula,
the Roman general who prompted a civil war that involved the AF mentioned Quinta
histor after his triumph Soula enacted prescriptions,
meaning that all of his powerful enemies were either put to death or banished.
And then the possessions were confiscated and put up for auction.
This allowed crashes to purchase massive amounts of lands in property for next
to nothing go him outta the war. Crass was not only rich,
but also had high political aspirations.
He knew that putting down the rebellion would secure his position in the Senate.
He used his own money to equip and train new troops.
He was made a Pretor and was granted command of six new legions plus what was
left of the two consular armies.
But first it looked like this military expedition would ends call the others
while crasus in the bulk of his army, waited for sparas on the borders of PCE.
He sent his Lego mumus with two legions to circle around and approach the
rebellion army from behind Crassus gave explicit orders not to attack the
insurgent. So even to engage in skirmishes,
mumus disobeyed feeling like he had an advantageous position.
He attacked and he lost clearly crisises needed to teach some discipline,
something he accomplished with an extreme measure.
He revived a punishment that had not been used for almost 200 years.
And that was decimation. The soldiers were divided into decades, decade here,
simply meaning a group of 10.
They drew lots and the losing soldier from every decade was executed. Again,
there is a bit of dis agreements over who CRA decimated exactly due a,
it was only one cohort of his 500 or so soldiers AIAN, however,
believed it was either the two consular legions or his entire army.
This is a pretty big detail because it makes the difference between the
execution of 50 soldiers. More or less in the execution of thousands,
either way,
the tactics seemed to work and crass showed his men that he was more dangerous
than the enemy
Crisis' methods might have been harsh, but the yielded results,
the following times that armies met him, battle Romans were victorious.
Sparas was forced to retreat to a region in Southern,
near league called blue talk reports that the Thra plan to take over the island
of Sicily and regroup that for this,
he negotiated passage with a group of CIC pirates. However,
with pirates being pirates,
they double crossed him and sailed away after being paid spar had back against
the wall. So we fell back to the peninsula of regime.
Cassius felt that he had victory in his grasp,
but he was wise enough to not underestimate the Thra.
As many had done before him, instead of forcing a battle,
he built fortifications across the air Smiths to the peninsula so that the
rebels would be cut off from many provisions. Indeed,
this tactic split the rebellious fighters into two groups.
One of them broke through the siege and started their own rating.
Campaign crashes fell upon them swiftly and destroyed men battle,
but he was disheartened to see that their fighting spirit had not been
extinguished. Although he killed over 12,000 insurgents upon inspection,
only two of them had wounds in their backs.
All of the others had died facing the enemy fighting until their last breath.
Meanwhile,
CRA sent other army led by one of his officer Quinters to pursue the Spartan
forces, which fled to the mountains.
The gladiator turned his troops around and met the Romans in battle and was
triumphant bolstered by the recent victory.
The rebels wanted to take on the main army of Craus
One final decisive battle suited CRAs just fine.
Although at first he seemed content with weakening the insurgents as much as
possible.
Now he was fighting against the clock as he received news that the Roman
reinforcement were on their way Poe the grave.
He managed to put down a rebellion in the Iberian peninsula and had redirected
his forces to take on Spartacus.
Other commands and named was also coming with additional soldiers.
You would think that the arrival of reinforcement would be good news for crass,
but he had no intention of sharing credit with anyone for putting down the
largest rebellion in Roman history before making his last stand Spartak has
actually tried to call Arus with crass,
but the Roman PR rejected it categorically to fill his ambitions,
nothing but the absolute iteration of the revolt would've suffice.
The Army's met the battle of St river. This Baran troop sport hard,
but was soundly defeated around 36,000 of them died in battle around 6,000 more
were taken prisoner by CRAs and were crucified along the Appian way about 5,000
rebels managed to flee the battle.
But they were met by Pompe who cut them to P pieces.
Pompe told Rome that even though crasus won the battle,
he extricated the war accordingly for this and his victory in his Spania.
He was given a major triumph upon his return and he was made consult.
In this case, a triumph is a Roman ritual,
which celebrates general successes in battle crass was later made AEN with
Pompe support. He also won over the masses of Rome by abusing his money,
to throw a giant feast in honor of Hercules and paying for everyone's grain
allowance for three months,
the two of them later formed an informal Alliance called the first Trive
alongside another Roman up and CU named Julius Caesar.
It would be nice if we could have ended with one final anecdote about sparas
since this bio is about him. Unfortunately,
history is seldom Matt accommodating.
He died in battle killed at an unknown time by an unknown soldier and his body
was never recovered, even though he had no possible way of knowing this Pluto,
a thoughts,
a more fitting end for the thro who tried to bring Rome to his knees.
He claimed that during battle sparas cut his way through the enemy ranks and
tried to reach crashes himself,
but was starved when two dead centurions fell upon him,
he was then completely surrounded and cut down while fighting to the bitter end.
So I hope you found that video date interest. Ding, if you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to subscribe,
hit that notification bell. Most importantly,
please do consider checking out our fantastic sponsor curiosity stream Lincoln
details below and as always thank you for watching.
<Silence>.